\documentclass[ebook, 10pt, openright, onecolumn]{memoir}
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\usepackage[english]{babel}
\usepackage[final]{microtype}
\usepackage{todonotes}
\title{Moments}
\author{Tyler Thomas}

\setlrmarginsandblock{0.15\paperwidth}{*}{1} % Left and right margin
\setulmarginsandblock{0.2\paperwidth}{*}{1}  % Upper and lower margin
\checkandfixthelayout

\def\signed #1{{\leavevmode\unskip\nobreak\hfil\penalty50\hskip2em
  \hbox{}\nobreak\hfil(#1)%
  \parfillskip=0pt \finalhyphendemerits=0 \endgraf}}

\newsavebox\mybox
\newenvironment{aquote}[1]
  {\savebox\mybox{#1}\begin{quote}}
  {\signed{\usebox\mybox}\end{quote}}


\newlength{\drop}
%% specify the Webomints family
\newcommand*{\wb}[2]{\fontsize{#1}{#2}\usefont{U}{webo}{xl}{n}}
%% select a (FontSite) font by its font family ID
\newcommand*{\FSfont}[1]{\fontencoding{T1}\fontfamily{#1}\selectfont}
%% if you don’t have the FontSite fonts either \renewcommand*{\FSfont}[1]{}
%% or use your own choice of family.
%% select a (TeX Font) font by its font family ID
\newcommand*{\TXfont}[1]{\fontencoding{T1}\fontfamily{#1}\selectfont}
%% Generic publisher’s logo
\newcommand*{\plogo}{\fbox{$\mathcal{T}$}}

\newcommand*\td[1]{
  \todo[inline]{
     #1 
  }
}

%% Define some commands for marking up the chapters 
\newcommand*\starbreak{\fancybreak*{* * *\\}}
\newcommand*\finish{\td{ ----- Finish this section -----}}



\newcommand*{\titleAT}{\begingroup  % Anatomy of a Typeface
  \thispagestyle{empty}
  \FSfont{5bp} % FontSite Bergamo (Bembo)
  \drop=0.1\textheight
  \vspace*{\drop}
  \rule{\textwidth}{1pt}\par
  \vspace{2pt}\vspace{-\baselineskip}
  \rule{\textwidth}{0.4pt}\par
  \vspace{0.5\drop}
  \centering
  {\FSfont{5ml} % FontSite Mona Lisa
    \Huge MOMENTS}\\[0.5\baselineskip]
  {\FSfont{5ml}
    \Large a memoir}\par
  \vspace{0.25\drop}
  \rule{0.3\textwidth}{0.4pt}\par
  \vspace{\drop}
  {\Large \scshape Tyler Thomas}\par
  \vfill
  {\large\scshape $T^2$ Press}\par
  \vspace*{\drop}
  \endgroup
}


%% At some point kill the chapter numbering in this pagestyle
\addtopsmarks{headings}{}{
  \createmark{chapter}{both}{shownumber}{}{. \ }
}
\pagestyle{headings}

\let\cleardoublepage\clearpage

%%% ===================================================== %%%
%%%                     BEGIN DOCUMENT                    %%%
\begin{document}

\pagestyle{headings}
\titleAT
\clearpage

\frontmatter

\null\vfill

\begin{flushleft}
  \textit{Moments}
  © COPYRIGHT Tyler Thomas

  2019
  
  ISBN--INFO

  ISBN--13: 
  \bigskip

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
  
  
\end{flushleft}

\clearpage
\tableofcontents
\clearpage

\mainmatter

\chapter{Desert}
\label{cha:desert}
\begin{aquote}{Latex Memoir Class Documentation}
  \textbf{memoir}, \textit{n.} a fiction designed to flatter the subject and to
  impress the reader.
\end{aquote}


I remember the desert most.  Days of walking down roads which led nowhere in the
hot sand and silence, my form of nihilism.  Whole days I would be gone, starting
in the comparative cool of the morning and returning as the sun set over a flat
horizon an incomparable distance away.  After school, after work, on the
weekends I would always seem to wander off a bit farther, never wanting to turn
back.  I would walk with water always, big jugs that I would lug along which
would start with ice and slowly warm to tepid, and then the hot before I could
quaff enough to sate the heat which dripped down my legs and dried crisp and
salty on my neck.  Yet it didn't matter.  Nothing mattered out there except to
keep going, to stay in motion for its own sake.  There was nothing else to do.
Walking was meditation, a activity to involve nothing but that one action in the
legs.  It was a escape in slow motion.  In the desert one could think and feel
and contemplate, and it was at the same time the irrelevance of the quotidian in
the silence and stillness of the terrain.  

Casting out into this distances in some omphalocentric perambulation, I always
arrive back where I begun both in mind and body, back at my house, an old single
wide trailer with wall of faded and broken paneling and a roof with tires on the
top for a reason I never knew and never asked.  We had torn all the carpeting
out when we moved in and painted a giant ill-formed bird on the living room
floor, everything else blue because that was some paint we had. The front door,
glued two-by-sixes, faced a view miles in size, and I would stand on the
creaking gray wooden porch and contemplate the mountains distant, ever inviting
me to their feet for no purpose.

The first landmark that one would find after leaving down the dirt road which
stretched out from home was a dirt damn known as \textit{the pond}.  This
purported `pond' usually was devoid of water and instead just a dry brown basin
to stand as emblem of the constant aridity of the landscape.  When the rains
would finally come first hesitantly, then completely, myriad arroyos would fill
the pond with a fragrant brown liquid still foamy after its hurried course.  And
suddenly a life hidden beneath the mud would emerge in the form of a million
frogs whose frenzied calls could be heard through the walls at night.  It was
the sound of a life-cycle, the hurried croaking in the dark while the water
drained away till only tadpoles remained frozen in clay, fossils which would
fade in days and then be gone with no trace of the life dug beneath the baked
earth.  A vast system of scales would appear where once water had been, and dry
till each crack curled upward and detached like sun-burnt skin, a flaky sea
that crunched underfoot.

That pond has always stuck with me, this one symbol of the desert, of my
childhood taking the dogs out walking, our big lumbering dog named Spike and her
tiny Chihuahua companion running hard by her side.  Spike would disappear for
hours and finally return home panting dirty with some adventure that only she
would ever know, dirt and strange smells clinging to her sides.  Later I would
go dove hunting out at that same pond, hiding in the bushes on the side, or
ranging further in search of rabbits.

Beyond the pond lay The Big Arroyo as we called it.  This formed the meeting
point of many smaller channels streaming down from jagged peaks of the Organ
mountains to the east.  After the rain, it would fill and become a roaring river
for half a day taking rocks and bushes to some resting place I would never see.
I would ride my bike to the top of the hill where the road intersected this
nascent river, and steeling myself attempt to come crashing down the hill and
into the swirling currents, pushing the peddles as hard as I could to get to the
other side while grass and twigs strained themselves into my spokes and slowed
my tires.  If the current was to strong, I would find myself holding with one
hand to my bike as we both were taken down the stream and trying to struggle to
the side.

The Organ mountains were the orientation of everything, establishing direction
in a land flat.  I once climbed over these mountains starting from my front
door, half a day gone in reaching them, the rest to scramble up the cliffs and
down the other side.  I thought I could return in the day still, but ended
instead sleeping astride the mountain's saddle next to a smoky little fire while
I shivered at its side.  I finally came home to a search party come from all
around to save me, myself sunburned and dirty wandering up to see what all the
fuss was about.  I still remember my mother come running out of the front door
to hug me and make sure I was in one piece still.

\finish

\starbreak

I could often be found next door digging up my uncle's yard, uprooting
mesquite bushes, battling their spines, reworking the land to something less
than wild.  My uncle and I had a struck a deal in which he would pay for my
first computer (a Gateway machine with a 10G hard-drive, a CD burner, a floppy
drive, and a dial-up modem) and I would landscape his yard at five dollars an
hour over the next year.  This was the point that I really fell into my
life-long love of computers.  I remember when I discovered the brilliant way in
which a web page worked, the systematic markup and the intricate way that
everything came together.  To think in the way that a computer thinks is to
contort one's mind into the ultimate systematic methodology of deconstructing
problems.  These problems are defined well enough on the computer, small
microcosms with fixed inputs and fixed outputs.  Yet, this type of thinking is
something which will scale upward also, structuring the ways that one thinks
about more complex aspects of nature.  I am always interested in the lack of
overlap between computer scientists and philosophers, as both seem to reinforce
each other. To my knowledge, the only philosopher of note has been Mencius
Moldbug \todo{Write about Moldbug?}, computer scientist and radical political
theorist.

\finish

Seven years I was home-schooled before I had taken the plunged and gone back to
public high-school starting freshman year.  It was a year of great angst and
exploration, this the first great Individuation from the outside.  Life prior
had been one familial, that of cousins and uncles primarily outside the nucleus
of mother and sister.  I would ramble between houses and desert, video games and
22 caliber rifles.  The heat was always present, a dry baking in the sun, in the
sand, a brief reprieve of the pool or a sprinkler till once again the dry heat
held me.  All this was my world till I turned fourteen and it opened to a whole
host of divergent lives which came and went in intersecting spirals.  The
cousins had all faded, all graduated or moved away, the diffusion of life in
full force.

I met Tony sitting on the floor in an indoor basketball court.  This was Phys
Ed, that awkward required class that all had to finally give themselves to, very
few willingly.  Tony, a strapping Irish boy just transferred sat on the floor
next to me. This was the part of the class that our body-building teacher failed
to learn the limits of the average high school student.  We did another set of
push-ups. Between sets, looking at my long hair and plaid attire standard at the
time, Tony's first words were, ``Hey\ldots hippy!''.  And thus began a strange
friendship.

Tony was less person than smirk.  He wold saddle up next to you and give that
laughing fist bump like you were in on a joke he was about to tell.  You were
being cultivated.  Tony's great joke was that he was always busy pulling
everyone inward, befriending all those in his orbit, charming each with the
comfort of his own skin.  Good looking, well built, he would work his bad-boy
shtick, the relaxed nihilism our age craves.

He would be no Good Boy.  Foster care at an early, he had floated between
houses, between moms, between other people's lives.  He had landed with a family
consummately middle class, a dog and no kids of their own.  Terry took them as
they where, well-intentioned and somewhat naive.  They would have him as that
nice middle class son, a set piece in their lives, a good son.  Yet real mom had
always told him, scolded him, yelled he was a bad boy.  Then came his new moms.
They kept packing him off to someone else, into someone other life, he never the
right boy, that good boy. 

And so he became the bad boy once more.  In the ferment of post-pubescent youth,
there is a draw to the rebel, a rejection of the order one has really never
known, a check he could now cash against his childhood.  To be an antinomian was
to have the ultimate individuation, to throw off even the society.  Everyone
wishes to be their own Napoleon and never realizes they are only a Raskolnikov
breaking something just to see what will happen. He was that fun force of chaos
that pulls inward like a black hole, everyone falling into Tony and his thrills.

\td{Rework all of this section}

Dropping out of school he took to check fraud after one day receiving a box of
checks in the mail addressed to a past tenant.  This was not his apartment, but
just that of a friend who let him stay. He would always find someone to let him
stay, inhabit there living room, eat their food and do their drugs and remake
their world into something like a nexus for all the traffic of Tony's life, he
the spider who had so craftily spun this web of people who came in pilgrimage
now.  He was the orchestrator, the center of this universe of people and
connections that flowed around him, bringing him all the things he needed or
wanted.  For years he rode couches and rode friends till the cops came and
kicked everyone out, leaving Tony always and somehow to escape and find a new
hole to squirrel himself into.  He was always fine --- till one day he wasn't.
Walking out of a gas station, a squad car awaited him.  Later he would learn
the man checking out before him was someone he had forged a check with weeks
before.  Tony had forgotten, but the man hadn't.  Tony spent my senior year in
jail.

\starbreak

Snider and I would sometimes skip school, escape the days expectations and
instead drive out into that still desert.  One of us always had pot stashed
among our things somewhere, a smelly sandwich bag hidden and a pipe in the glove
box. We would smoke and laugh and hackysack and hackysack for hours, circling
each other like pugilists, making trails in the dirt as this tiny ball the only
point of contact.  Finally hunger and pain would drive us from our trance and
back to my house and the world once more.  I would make a skillet overflowing
with stacked red enchiladas, refried pintos, top in lettuce and tomatoes and
sided with chips and toast with honey.  We would feast till we were both sated
and unmovable and contemplate our day and try to forget the morrow.

Other nights we would go scavenge wood from creosotes, build our little
stash into a fire and sit the night around with Old English 40s and laugh and
yell and scavenge more wood in the dark till we gave it all up and unrolled our
sleeping bags under a sky whose horizon was only where stars ceased to be, and
stayed the night in the open air and dreams of nothing.  The morning was always
gray in our haze with not a cloud in the sky.  The dust was in our hair and the
smell of smoke in our clothes, the night prior now memories and the future was
always crashing towards us still.

Then there was Jessica. Jessica and her tits.  She would pull them out at all
times, the young man's totem, huge and hanging like planets.  Pink pillowy
things with areolae bumpy and stretched, she would hike up he shirt and display
them for all occasions.  She would show strangers in cars next to ours, to
pedestrians, to anyone who looked interested.  We would all wait expectantly to
see when the time was right, when was the next showing. Then out they would
come, and all laughing we would secretly congratulate ourselves for something
not understandable.

One night she masturbated in my back seat while I drove down a road spotted in
street lights, Tony riding shotgun and smoking.  Light and dark would
alternatively show her face twisted in my rear-view mirror, moans from a face
for a moment then from the dark.  Tony and I were quiet, neither of us knew what
to do.  ``Are we almost there?'', she asked casually when she was done.

\starbreak

The three of them walked in to my chemistry class together.  Had they all met
before, or was it now that they where just drawn to each other? Nga and Nhi were
both from Vietnam, quiet girls demurring. Then Anja, from Thailand. 


Anja had a charm probably known as spunk, some confidence I could never quite
find even if I tried to fake it. She knew only to act, not to think too much
about that action.  After me reciting the contours of a fear I had, she would
respond, ``So! Just do it'', and I know this no hyperbole.

There was something so attractive about her difference, about the
incomprehensibility of the foreign.  I would sometimes look at her askance and
think her another species, something superior, something pristine and yet
hardened to life in a way impossible to me.  She was this thing from the outside
which came here of her own accord from across the globe, from a life I would
never understand, from a place too different to comprehend.   

\finish

I had fallen for the first time, some puppy love maybe, something too hard to
analyze even with words for categories.  Snider and I were riding back one
night, and I, high and horny, sat shotgun concentrating my whole desire, my
whole being on trying to manifest Anja's presents right then and right there.
To have her sit with me in that moment, and feel her warmth and her breath, to
know her somehow made solid with my touch, that I could make choate this
emptiness by the sheer force of desire.  I still remember that moment so
distinctly, all my will focused on the one thing lest available to its force.  I
closed my eyes to my dreams and the car hummed as we plied the way home, Snider
and I both quiet, lost to our fictions and dreams of a world not the one we
inhabited.  

It was not long after she left again for Thailand, for her family and her
career.  Now she is a doctor, married to another doctor and both in love, both
the right fit.  It's interesting to know oneself not the one for someone else.
Their life diverging in ways that you cannot keep concourse with.  It is to
abandon someone to their best life, to give them back to a karma unearned by
you.  It is to appreciate them as something removed from yourself, freed from
that carnal grasping and only as another divine spark which you want to catch
fire.

\starbreak

Prom night the triad of Tony, Snider and I decide it was time instead for a boys
night, a protest against our being single.  We would instead take the night by
storm and have a party our own.  There are certain dates which are tyrannical in
their implicit expectation.  As much as the idea is denounced or the holiday
derided, the lack of a feeling, an experience, is felt a loss nonetheless.  It
is to be sad for something one wants not to want.  Being alone on December 25th
will always feel a magnitude more empty than any other day; and the same is true
of those who try and deny Prom its due.

We had passed money to the right person and ended with alcohol, a thing
difficult to obtain normally.  After having scoured the town for parties, for
things interesting and coming up short, we decided to go visit Paul who lived in
the Porta-Potty at the park.

The three of us had met Paul a month prior.  After a good hack session going
late into the night, Tony took leave to relieve himself by visiting the line of
Porta-Potties set shoddily at the edge of the parking lot, the solution to a
broken bathrooms never repaired.  Tony, having approached the largest of the
lot, one made for the possibly disabled or the odd family, threw open the door
and started in only to be standing approximately on top of someone sleeping on
the floor.  After both had let out the appropriate expletive laden sounds, with
Tony having retreaded a good several yards in a motion not unlike teleportation,
everyone stopped to take stock of what had just happened.  The commotion had
brought myself and Snider over to have a look.  Tony gave us a recap of having
just kicked a man lying on the floor of the blue toilet, and after a strained
laugh, we conferenced as to what to do?  Was the guy drunk?  Was he dying?  Why
was he there?  ``Well, better ask'', Tony decided for the lot of us, and once
more approaching the potty knocked gently and bid the inhabitant a questioning
hello.  The response was normal enough for a man found sleeping in a park in an
extra-large portable toilet.  He even was nice enough to open the door after a
strained exchange of greetings and we came to know his name as Paul.

Paul was a man that looked like life hadn't given him a good day for a decade or
more.  Wearing dirty stain sweatpants and turtleneck fashionable for the 50s, he
told us of himself.  A man more in body than in mind, he seemed in a cycle of
the street.  His last attempt to find four walls not of plastic ended when his
last check was mugged, leaving him again to return to his Porta-Potty.  A simple
man, torn to pieces by life, left to the vicissitudes un-understandable to a
mind like his. Not only was it his mind, but also his body that had the worst of
it, with him missing a leg. Or such was what we assumed given his awkward gate
and the odd \textit{swoooshing} sound of a compressing hinge emanating from the
pants hiding his knee-like apparatus as he walked.  We bought him Taco Bell and
wished him well, for what else could we do?

Paul was the poor \textit{reprobatus} of some Calvinist deity, someone too low
in life to ever find a salvation.  These are the un-elect whom one feels helpless to
help, Paul floating in a world too far away to ever find his way back, in some unjust
judgment too hard for us to contest, too complicated for our own lives filled
already.  We drove away talking in low tones about how life can take a person to
such lows, unimaginable to us.  It was then that we decide on the one small
step, that one thing we could do for us as much as Paul, was to buy him a bungee
cord to keep his door closed at night.  The following day, we went on a mission
to the nearest home store to get this ersatz lock, gifting it to him with
several tacos and a twenty dollar bill.

It was to this Paul we now went with beer and pot and tacos in hand.  As it
turned out, Paul was nowhere to be found, and would never be found by us again.
We ate his Tacos and set up in the park anyway, ate and smoked and drank and
where happy in our youth and our debauch.

\starbreak

High-school is the age which one can still be said to have ``promise'', some
mystical check to cash in the future.  My life at this time rode always two
parallel paths, one of promise, and one of dissolution.  The last year of
high-school I fought for an extra Advanced Placement class, a fifth
college-level chemistry instead of a standard four class semester, or the two
classes I needed to graduate. This is called, ``being an over-achiever.''  Yet,
my days were spent mostly in debauch, in search of the good time of drugs
and dissipation.  I would come to class high most mornings having not done my
homework.  I made no apologies, took zeros on the work and got As on tests, and
generally acted like I didn't care a whole lot.  I had always harbored a secret
comfort of being certain I was the smartest student in most rooms I entered.
To ensure I never had to  test the issue, I held my grades lightly, uncaringly
as a shield.  

The economies of public schools are so very different from their purported
mission.  Those who are good at learning the material of which most classes
consist is something disincentivized by the majority of one's peers.  And this
is the paradox, the difference that one must always split between that of the
peer-group, and then that of the institution.  My game was to play both sides of
the field, to be both the rebel and the scholar.  To find approbation on both
sides and not have to choose.

Was it this that led to the great discovery of my youth, that I had to break all
molds if I was to not be found lacking in some metric.  I would break the
meter, reform the measurements, and by this I would avoid judgment, for to what
standard could I be held?  

\chapter{Adobe}
\label{cha:adobe}

I came to Santa Fe following the whiff of truth, subject to the oft-mistake of
those who find philosophy in the heat of youth; to think life really reducible
to a predicate logic like Russel's \textit{Principia}. It was only to follow it
out far enough, and in the end would emerge some shinning Truth to calm that
unnamed disquiet which pervades life before growing fully into one's skin.  It
cannot be there are no answers, only experimentation, only questions fraught
with unclear answers.  The tyranny of our freedom has yet to find us.  The
disgust at our fall still convicts us.  And so the sensitive end with Plato
under our arm and a question on our face.  We come with hat in hand to ask the
ages why and what and to please explain.

And thus I came to St Johns College, a little liberal arts college tucked into
the hills of the mountain Atalaya, all adobe and curves and shrouded by Pinons.
Individuation comes in spurts, and the moment one moves from home is a maximal
point of change with little left in the way of the familiar.

I was to have a dorm on the second floor, a tiny space almost a closet off the
main room of my roommate, a red-headed city boy from Seattle named Roy who was
always sure he's about to have a really good time.  Or at least half the time,
as Roy was two people, one studious and well spoken, the other an Id incarnate.
The first wore button up shirts and would speak in fully formed sentences, and
discourse on the art of life and love.  The second owned a Curious George body
suit and was out to cause havoc in any and all ways possible.  Curious Roy was
someone I would meet later in the year, the irrepressible alter-ego that first
peeks, and then comes crashing through a facade of maturity.  Yet both knew of
each other, and both approved.  Neither thought ill of the either.

After graduating from high school Roy had gone to India for several months
traveling around in trains and feeling out of place entirely.  Coming back, he
drove his 1954 Volvo out of the Seattle and East on a rode trip to
circumnavigate the boarder of the country, sleeping in small town and parking
lots and always pushing on to the next place.  He would tell stories of nights
spent alone in dirty motels watching TV and drinking beer, feeling alone in the
world.  

\finish

\chapter{Forest}
\label{cha:forest}

To live in the forest is to know oneself not part of nature.  It is be sure the
universe has ends not for us.  Religion is waning in the West for a good
reason; when most of the world seems made to cater to our whims what is there to
remind us that we live only in a shell of our own creation.

I moved to the forest while patches of snow still stood brindling the
ground. Most of my possessions had been carted back down south with the help of
my mother, leaving only myself and an old forest-green canvas duffel bag which
dwarfed my frame as I struggled out of campus and into the forest to the North.

The question of the possible is so bound by episteme unseen the majority of the
time.  Cultures create systems so seamless that to find a gap is to have found
something brilliant, a pin of light leaking in from the unknown.  These are left
unusually only to those few who are pushed out not of their own will, but
because they where not quite ever in; these are the tramps and the vagabonds,
the addicts and the saints.  Then there are those few of choose, who wish to
experiment with life and cast aside all expectation and run headlong into some
unknown.  I would not call this finding the authentic as Sarte would, but
instead call it play.

The human is an amazingly adaptable beast.  The patterns of life necessary for
forest living are all in the end completely manageable.  One's days become
structured just as do all other lives.  There is an inversion which happens, the
hard things becoming easy and the easy becoming hard.  Water becomes something
precious, not had without a huge investment in time and effort.  Yet one has not
to worry about paying the water bill, or of the piping in the house, or of water
the plants in the yard.  Now the difficulty is in the schlepping requisite
bottles of the stuff to camp.  A calculus must always be made between the weight
and the want.  To carry more than necessary is perverse, but to not carry enough
is torture.  Most thing exist between these two points of the campers continuum,
and one is always and forever reevaluating the point one thought ideal even
yesterday.

\finish

One was only to ever increase oneself both in mind and body, not
necessary in corpulence, but in ones adjuncts.  Accouterments all expanded
oneself, a form of the extended phenotype which would push the self outward.


It was over this summer I also picked up a job at Trader Joe's for the first
time, a place whose gravitational pull I would find inescapable for the next
decade.  Growing up in southern New Mexico, the cult of Joe had not yet made it
that far south.  The company still was primarily based on the coasts, not yet
moving inland more than in a odd city here or other. Santa Fe was one of these
odd little outposts, no other stores existing in any nearby states excepting
Arizona.  It was not for another decade that Texas  would get it's first
store with Colorado following two years after that.

\finish

And so I stocked frozen food and learned the lingo of the bourgeois foodie. I
learned that a boule and hummus made a good snack but if you had a bit of

\chapter{Hovel}
\label{cha:hovel}

The job was unclear but the pay was good.  I was to move mail up and down a
mountain, the mailman for the post-office.  I was to be a ``subcontractor'', which
at the age of twenty-one sounds as though one is doing something important, that
some trust has been given.

In two cities I would live, one in the mountains and one in the sand.  A truck
was to be mine, driven back and forth over eighty miles each day split in
halves, the day in Mayhill, the night in Alamogordo.  Two shifts each day, 5:00
am to 7:00 am, and 3:00 pm to 5:00 pm, seven days a week except one shift on
Sunday.  My life was to be bifurcated between two lives, one in a town so small
that Main Street ended at 12, and one in a town I kept at arms length always.

I had bought an 10-speed old Reighley racing frame at a bike shop in town and
had it stripped and remade into a beautiful ride.  A Selle Anatomica saddle, new
cables, tires, spokes, chain, and grip tape.  After replacing the peddles with
toe clips I could hum around town with no special accouterments, still sleek and
fast. Tube-shifters makes the riding experience special, something akin the
driving a standard transmission.  The act of changing gears becomes costly, it
cannot be done with abandon like with brifters.  To pedal then is not to run
that one easy crank RPM too natural, but to feel the range, the hard and easy,
to start with strain and end puffing.

The Sacramento mountains flank Alamogordo, forming a backdrop to the west of
town.  The mountains rise first roundly, then starkly five thousand feet above
the city.  To the east, only the horizon hundreds of miles away forms the rim of
a flat desert without differentiation.  In 1945 the US government built the
largest military installation and missile range in the sprawling desert outside
the largest gypsum deposit on earth, White Sands Monument.  Not long after, the
first atomic bomb darkened the skies above this barren basin. After the war, V2
rockets were stolen and refined here. 

\finish

And so for the day I was to live in this hovel, a half-build shed over a rotting
travel trailer.  The axles had been taken off and the whole thing set on the
ground to rot away at a rate unequal to its additions.  A gabled roof was set
above, framed and insulated, yet still leaking in all the elements.  There were
no shingles to face the sky, only graying plywood warped and fraying at the
edges.  When the rain came, a bevy of ice chests without lids were ready at hand
to collect the torrents of water that would come channeled down into house, into
walls and through crack and come trickling out in obscure corners.  Above the
bed, water would work its way between the paint and sheet rock, forcing down
till it had bulged the paint into a perfect breast shape, and from the nipple
drips would appear one after another.  I had to keep a bucket on the bed those
nights or the whole bed would be wet with lactation in the morning.

The bathroom was a toilet and a old tub set right on the dirt.  The toilet
actually was hooked into a sewer system, but the tub just had a pipe that poked
out of the hill a little ways down.  A wall had been framed up and put around
the whole affair, but these new walls didn't match up with the main gable, so
with a little corrugated metal and a few more 2x2s, something resembling a roof
was thrown up, never mind the large gaps.  The bathroom was well vented,
especially when there was a breeze.  For the floor, a refashioned piece of blue
carpet, whose origin was probably stolen from condemned house somewhere, was cut
to fit and laid down over the dirt.  When the rain came, the carpet would pull
the water from the dirt underneath making a squishing sound.  The day after a
fresh rain, I would arrive in the still breaking dawn, and there would be big
beautiful mushrooms which had sprung up overnight arrayed around the base of the
toilet, growing right out of that blue carpet. In the winter the bathroom was
too porous to the outside to be heated from the single gas heater which could
only really change the temperature of that one small room.  Instead of
collecting the harvest mushrooms from the night before, my first act would be to
chip the away the ice from the toilet bowl so that I could flush before I
finished by coffee.  Each morning had its proper order of things.


Nights were spent on the edge of town, locking my bike last light post before I
hit the darkness of desert and open land.  I crossed the street and climbed the
hill opposite town till I could see dark city as a mirror to the stars above.
It was only in the night I could climb and not be seen, the desert to naked to
know any modesty about who beds in her bosom.  Desert inclines are always steps,
swathes of elevation which suddenly level as though the hill were unsure of
itself, before continuing again its incline.  The first mesa was my choice, a
struggle against bushes and cactus till I topped the side and would check for
cactus needles caught unbeknownst to me somewhere.  In the summer I'd strip to
my skivies, hang my sweat-laden clothes in a bush, and unroll my tarp.  I made a
game of toughening myself to the ground, to the rocks and the debris beneath me,
each night choosing ground slightly less even, less inviting.  One night the
rain had come cold, unexpected, and sideways with the wind.  I rolled myself
into a burrito, blue tarp holding off the cold rain seeping into the old fabric,
the old holes.  Lying on rocks in the desert, wrapped in an old found tarp while
shivering uncontrollably, all I could think was, ``Well, this will be a great
memory!'', and dissolve the present in the future.  Everyone has their own
quantification of ``tough'', and I chose mine abstrusely.

4:00 AM the alarm would sound, a battery-powered travel clock ding into the open
desert from the corner of the tarp.  Everything was rolled and strapped to my
backpack in the dark, then I would be off ambling down the hill to my bike,
always worried it wouldn't be there.  Once alight, the rest was easy, flying
down hill to my truck parked safely in town, to load up and start the adventure
up the hill again. 

In the winter I moved to the truck, the desert too cold for my gear.  It was
something like an unpainted U-Haul with a little door between the cabin and the
box on the back.  If the door was left open, I could sleep in the box with my
head not far from the door.  A second alarm was bought, this one set a ten
minute interval from the first.  Now when the first alarm would sound, I could
stretch an unwilling arm out into the cold enough crank the key set ready in the
ignition.  Retreating back to my sleeping bag, I would await the second alarm in
my half-dreams till the cabin was hot with the heater blowing full blast, the
engine now warm.  After a clamber into the cabin, always ungraceful at this
hour, the Thermos of tea made the evening before was perfect temperature.  Hot
tea in the cold of morning will always convince me that my life choices have not
all been bad.  That first drink still in the haze of dream. 
Pulling my bedding behind me into the passenger seat, I'd throw the truck in
drive and zoom off to get the mail one more time. 

Storms would cover the highway, a tenuous road in good weather and always
subject to rock slides.  The sheered faces were netted so boulders couldn't
launching themselves too far, yet this could never prevent their eventual
landing in the middle of the road.  It was no rare event to discover the road
nearly blocked by some few tons of stone just around a bend, now taking the
majority of both lanes.  The highway department would be out by the time I was
retracing my tracks, guiding traffic around and attempting to undo the damage.
Once up the hill, the road leveled off and turned into a snaking valley.  The
stream and cow pastures would entice all the wildlife in those dim hours while
the dew could still be seen hovering above the field full of deer.  The elk were
most normalized to the road, grazing just off its side, watching with
indifferent eyes as my truck flew past a few feet away.

\starbreak

After schlepping the mail up the hill, five stops in 80 miles, I would come to
rest in Mayhill, a town with two stores and a main street paved half way and
ending after address 12.  The last address belonged to Gruncle Brew, my
grandfathers cousin whose connection to the family become something fuzzy enough
for a neologism.  Gruncle Brew, the old cowboy, born in the dust bowl and pushed
west with the rest of his clan.  He landed in California like most did,
scratching his way as a young man till he was no longer.  I only know him in his
second act, retired welder, grader, cowboy, handyman, moonshiner, and chicken
fighter.  He had stories of wrestling cattle and welding up a moonshine stile in
Louisiana somewhere out in the bayou.  He had once build his own dump truck and
hired himself out moving dirt.  He was one of those people who was too poor to
go to school but too poor not to know how to do everything.

He still had his game cocks locked in pens in the back yard.  The hens
were worth more, breeding stock like money in the bank in Mexico.  Yet no one
came to buy a bird so far away and up a hill in the middle of
nowhere. Cockfighting was banned in every state now, had to go all the way down
to Mexico.  Brew would always be on about going down there, to go make some
money, but he never would.  He would raise his chicks and sell to no one, each
generation instead growing the number of cages.  In his old age he become
attached to his birds, too much time spent there with them, sitting out under
his elm tree.  Each morning he would prepare their food meticulously, passing by
each cage in turn, his little wiener dog named Princess always right behind. He
would ladling just the right amount for each bird with some formula he'll take
to the grave.  He couldn't fight them, yet couldn't give them up.

I learned to play music from Brew; or, rather, I learned to want to play music.
He had an old Martin with the frets worn down to the wood he would pull out and
suddenly the gruff voice would change and he was mellifluous.  All the
intonations of a hard life were gone, and instead he would croon some sweet
melody over that old guitar whose wood was old as he was, older.  His daddy had
bought his that guitar when they still had dirt floors in old Cali.

It was not the glories that he would remember though, it was only the faults.
Night were spent awake, thinking of the past, of all the moments gone wrong, of
all the things which should have been, been said and weren't, all the things
done now shameful.  It was the remnant of a life as most was even now the past,
his faith in heaven the only salvation.  He would endlessly talk of the bible,
of things yet to come, of times of perfection unable to be had in days such as
this, in the fallen world, a Kali Yuga of the age and himself.  The ceiling
above his bed was his tormentor, staring like the void back at him in the dark,
convicting, convicting.

He came to Jesus hat in hand, came for forgiveness of a life gone somehow all
wrong, the next life there to try again, to get in all right this time.  Somehow
things where always askew, how?, never sure. 

\finish

In this job I learned to fear time.  The much to used adage that the mail must
always go through was true to my station. Three times late in two years and the
contract could go up for big again, and bye bye my job, and maybe the contract
owner, Jed.  The last driver had run through two of those leaving me none.  It
was for me to be there everyday, rain or shine, sleet of hail.  Jed have sold me
the truck, packed his things from the hovel, and moved to Iowa where he bought a
trailer and setup a new life.  I ran the mail and we both got paid, the Walmart
travel alarm the barrier between both our jobs and filing for unemployment.

My paranoia started with the naps.  After a 5:00 am shift, I would come rolling
into Mayhill and crawl into the bed housed in the hovel, not yet ready to
approach the day.  The sun would just be up over the mountains and I would be
once again in some dream of people past and time outside time.  I would crack a
lid, that tiny shaft of lift into my retina, and with a logic incoherent I would
come flying out of bed, sure I had missed that hateful alarm and the day had
come without me, I still supine and the mail waiting on the dock now for
someone else to come collect it.  Having hove myself into the middle of the
room, head not right but my pulse already up, I would stand dazed, and wonder
why I was already in Mayhill, what this meant and why I had stayed the night
here.  Then the morning would come crowding back like the end of a mushroom
trip, the contours of life reshaping themselves into some linear timeline. 


\finish


\starbreak

Days I didn't go in search of Brew, didn't find him sitting in his
camp chair out back by the tree, I would bike.  My tour bike was set at the
ready, always oiled and aired, cleaned and calibrated.  This place was a way to
the future, to leave this hovel to rot into the ground and cycle off in some
direction for no reason at all.  I wanted most to have no map, no timetable, and
place to call home.  I wanted to improvise each day, to choose who I was each
time I rolled into town for a day, an hour, or long enough just to peddle
through.  I wanted to exist only in the short-term memory of everyone I met, a
passing face to recall never again.  Wasn't this real freedom?  How could
anything else be, bound by everyone's idealization of yourself, a mental model
existing in someone's skull of you.

So I would push off from the hovel drive and onto the highways which spidered
the mountains and valleys of New Mexico, long winding roads with no one but me
there.  It would be hours sometimes before some care would crest the hill ahead,
a dot still, and grow till it finally passed, only to change octave and recede
till unseen around a bend.  Mostly the roads where mine, constructed for me to
find a lonely happiness out there peddling with all I had.

I would each day push to find that place of remove, the place after the
endorphins fade, after the burn of muscle dims, after everything had been given,
and there was nothing left but that crank turning, turning, turning.  It was the
meditation of action, the silencing of mind my having no energy to think of the
past or the future, it was to be empty.  It was to find nirvana, not that
heavenly bliss nonsense, but the snuffing out, the nothingness of the I.  

Then one day I pushed too hard, too fast, too far.  I climbed to Sunspot, an
observatory forty miles of mountains and valleys three thousand feet above me.
I rode so well that day, there and back in five and a half hours. It was also
that day I partially ruptured my quadriceps tendon in my left knee and killed
all the plans I had made for myself.



\chapter{Stairs}
\label{cha:stairs}

The first thing one has to learn to do in Vietnam is cross the street.  It
requires a confidence that does not come easily for the Occidental just wondered
off the plane.  Everything moves in ways that one can never quite quantify, a
system still opaque in expectation and action.  Traffic is at once something one
could reasonably call a free-for-all, or in the same moment something so planned
out as a minutely choreographed set of intertwined actions.  In actuality is it
the definition of the emergent system. Like the human body, with each part doing
its small bit, something like a vast system emerges.

Like most other countries, the associated food which comes to define the cuisine
in foreign places is not the thing most eaten back at home. With Vietnam, its
two most known exports, Pho and the Banh Mi, are only a small tip of a menu so
vast as make these two items unimportant to the whole corpus.  Why is it that
counties who rely on the import of food from the world likewise only has room
for some small set of dishes?  Is it that there is no demand for the
complexities, or is it that each new restaurant only copies the one before it
until there is a self-enforce monopoly of only a select few dishes arbitrary in
origin?

\end{document}

% Local Variables:
% eval: (add-to-list font-latex-match-reference-keywords (quote (("td" "{") ("todo" "{") ("finish" "{") ("starbreak" "{"))))
% End: