---
layout: post
title: Debates
date: 
description: Watching debates on the internet
image: /assets/images/
author: Tyler Thomas
tags: [philosphy, thoughts]
---


To loose several hours of life, it doesn't take much more than to lookup debates
on your favorite hot topics on the internet.  Youtube has libraries of debates,
the most viewed of which were back in the hay-days of the New Atheist movement
and featured such prominent proponents as Christopher Hitchens and the ever
present Dinesh D'Souza who managed to always find himself a place in the sun on
all hot-button issues.

Every debate though has a format, and all center around a similar framework.
There is always a long period up front to lay out one's position generally.  The
opening statements may be as long as 20 min in which to prove the existence of
God or the rightness of climate policy.  Then there will be several response
periods, seemingly never more than two each, and finally closing statements.
While a schema like this seems to encapsulate all the makings of a good
framework, it never quite pans out.

First there is the proposition to be argued.  I am reminded of my college
experience while trying to find topics for a paper, and each time I would
propose a subject to my advisor, I would be met with, "Too big.  Try something
smaller.", and they were inevitably correct.  A standard topic for debate in any
of the larger venues where always of a cosmic scale, something with so many
complexities that it would require a book as mere prolegomena.

With topics of such scale, both interlocutors can manage to discuss purportedly
the same topic for several hours, yet neither can ever make contact with the
other's arguments as the field of topics is too large.  I am reminded most of
the debate between Slavoj Zizek and Jordan Peterson who took the debate in such
contrary directions that it was mostly two divergent presentations happening
only in an interleaved into a single event.  If anyone thought a productive
conversation could be had from a subject as generous as "Happiness: Capitalism
vs. Marxism" (especially with Zizek, who is a case study of lateral and
divergent thinking) I merely two hours, I wonder how easy the world must appear
to some. 

On thing which has to be done with any two intellectuals who hold a systematic
epistemology is to use the debate topic as something of a maieutic method to
establish a starting point from which each can talk of the same subject in the
same world.  The famous debate between Noam Chomsky and  Michel Foucault was a
perfect exemplification of the problem.  Both where enmeshed in a system which
subsumed the world, but neither touched upon the other.  In this way, the
conversation could only ever be around the edges where a word or phrase could
provide fodder to delve again into one's own well worn mental channels and follow
out the argument in the way that has been done many times before.

The second problem is the general format which allows too much time between
speakers.  In any normal situation, a conversational debate can never be had
when one speaker is given a full twenty minutes to make his case, and then the next
another twenty.  Too many things can be said which require a response, too much
to be remembered by either the contenders or their audience.  If each were
restricted to a mere couple of points with the next speaker's response
instantaneous, something approximating an evolving conversation could maybe
created.  In several debate I have seen, there may indeed be several periods
of response, but these are still measured out in five minute increments, and
most are generally spend addressing points made in the opening stage of the
dialog.  The whole experience then is of a skipping record in which one can
never quite seem to find the thread, but instead are asked to keep multiple
tracks open at all times.

Then there is the problem of the moderator, who so much of the time decides to
interject question which were no in the flow of the contestant's conversation,
and in this way only manage to complicate everything further and making a muddle
of any track which may be for even a moment settled upon.  Moderators should be
superfluous except to act as a check when one speaker seems merely to be running
down the clock when there is none.  Any debate should be on good honor in the
way one takes time in the conversation, yet there are those I think innately to
in love with their own voice to notice their monopoly of attention (see Zizek).

The third and most glaring problem is audience participation.  This is not a
caucus where the totality in attendance is to participate.  Generally the
audience is a mass of laymen with no real understanding of the issues at hand,
and questions to match.  The contribution of either silly questions, or mere
exposition of ideology thrown at the stage as though one is trying to declare
one's inability to take arguments into account, provide nothing to the
discussion from those who purportedly are the experts.  The audience sits more
as an indicator of the futility of debates, reminding the participants arguments
are worth nothing with the mass of men. 

I am always amused by the questions
which oft start debates, a survey is handed out with a question such as, "How
open to persuasion are you?".  There is always quite a wide margin in assent,
yet when the tally of those converted at the end comes back nearly nil, one has
to question the reliability of self-reported open mindedness.  It does not sit
well with most mental conceptions to say, "I am incapable of changing my mind",
yet given the confirmation biases inherent to the human condition, most of this
claimed openness must be mere pretense.


