---
layout: post
title: Kayfabe
date: 
description: The inexorable rise of Kayfabe
image: /assets/images/kayfabe.jpg
author: Tyler Thomas
tags: [politics, culture]
---

WrestleMania has made a come back, but not as a sport with men wearing tights
and strutting about a ring in so obvious a manner.  This time it has become a
political science term to denote something of an inherent insincerity in a
politician or voter.  The Economist has found in Trump something less of a
politician than an inveterate wrestler[^1] (a connection quite natural, as
Donald Trump has indeed actually been in the ring [^2]).  It is easy to see the
chanting crowds at any rally engaged in a self-induced fantasy, chanting "Lock
Her Up!" as though this were a panacea for modernity.  All policy is subject to
the symbolic order: "BUILD THE WALL".  Why a wall when the mass of caravans come
for asylum?  It can be chanted more easily than "REFORM THE LAWS ON WHAT CAN BE
CLASSIFIED AS A VALID ASYLUM CLAIM!"  If forced to choose, would a Trump booster
chanting in the aisle choose the wall or the reduction in (illegal) immigrants?

One can find a similar symbolism on the complete opposite side.  John McWhorter
calls the protests of campus 'woke' students an act more akin to kayfabe than in
pursuit of an actual cause[^7].  These overly vocal youth are really engaged in
something of a secondary symbolism, a performative act, some even going so far
as to engage in street battles with an opponents manufactured to fit ones story
line.  Antifa and the Proud Boys are nothing other than nascent factions who
found an *angle* (storyline).  Being part of Antifa himself, Geoffrey Miller
explains[^8] the act of battle is something more akin to Fight Club (an escape
from the boredom of modernity) and that of the WWF feud in which one fights a
performative battle with a heel one builds for one's own fans.

Then there are the Twitter mobs, a violate mass of humanity whose actions are
explained only in group psychology.  The individual who condemns and the
condemned are in this world both dehumanized, both being merely a platform for
the *id* multiplied by the frantic millions.  The language of morality is mere
currency to be spent freely but never truly considered.  Has the "symbolic act"
increased as of late, or has it been forever part of our political discourse?

Since the founding of this nation politics has always been something proposed as
consisting of a *rational voter* who knows his self-interest and votes to
further its end.  This was not to say that there was not also the threat of the
tyrant which could rise in the midst of the democratic process and overwhelm it.
It was Plato[^3] who James Madison quoted when thinking about democracy: it was
a system unstable as an excess of liberty will
push inexorably to a tyranny.  

The political dialog has also become so retrenched, everything becoming
symptomatic of something else, something larger.  If a politician says something
untoward, it is no longer to him that we direct our ire, but use him to critique
always a larger thing, a bigger who.  One person is no longer sexist, the
culture is.  No longer can some one individual be ill-tempered, now they must
become to representative of some larger point or whole.  We have become too
obsessed with systems, explanatory devices that by their own definition have to
be too simple to encapsulate all the complexities of any given circumstance.
Our critical theories have come to be embraced by all sides, even those who call
them something else.  The Right's "cultural rot" is nothing more than another
critical theory which stretches only over a short time horizon so that the
promised land can still be glimpsed from behind.  The Left has a fictive *tabula
rasa* in mind when they talk of Power Structures, castles of repressive
assumptions only now become clear.  When was our fall?  It must have been in the
time of Eden, not by a snake but by our having constructed the gender binary.
And so we all become lost in our abstractions and loose the present and the
person to the past and to our system.

Politics has in the end always tended to an irrationality in this country[^4]
and I would suspect most others.  There is what Brian Caplan would call
"rational irrationality" in the voting public[^5]; each voter has so little a
chance of casting a decisive vote, that the penalty of voting irrationally is
negligible almost all of the time.  The paradox of the system is the same as the
Tragedy of the Commons, that en masse voters will collectively push politics
into something irrational even though each voter has little say.  Even if one
has the rare last casting vote to break a political tie, one is still
constrained by the binary of the parties as they are with little choice aside
from those which are prescribed.  To say that one is free to choose seems a bit
of a stretch if you desire neither, yet one will come to pass regardless.

But do political ideologies form in general outside of the political system, or
do the systems come first and the ideologies come second?  Two contrary examples
can be posed: One of talk radio, which pulled the audience away from the
politicians within the party of their choosing and toward a test of purity.  The
other is that of Trump, and how those who claimed an ideological basis have
completely given it over to the politician.  One can see this in the layered
nature of political affiliation currently, that on the right it is common to
hear that one may identify as a Conservative first, and a Republican second.
This same impulse is also creating the move towards the Independent Voter block,
most of which are not centrists, but mere protesters of their previous party.

There will forever be a disconnect between the practice of the profession
politicians and that of the ideology which they advocate.  They are bound in one
way to speak in absolutes, to claim that through sheer force of will the
opposition could be overcome and a pure system instated.  The cause also must be
made a moral cause with all positions not arbitrary preference or even
self-interest, but made of a right understanding of comic justice.  If one does
not agree, it is not for lack of insight, but pure malice.  In the end, all
roads lead to negative partisanship, such that in the end dogma will fall victim
to it's advocates and all that will be left is to vote in the negative. Enter
Trump.

Donald Trump exists as a sticks in the eye of all professional politics.  He was
the vote against all parties, against all ideologies which had been
systematically devalued by political realists and professionals all the while
still shilling a pure orthodoxy to gin up the votes.  And in the end, the result
is that all politicians have been found wanting, and a dilettante has been made
king.  Yet while he may only have kludged himself onto a party, that party still
has the instinct of self-preservation, and so all now come to bend the knee and
act as though he were their champion and not their rebuff.

  But isn't this also why all politician
speak in a dialect which sounds so sonorous and filled with platitudes, the real
Orwellian Newspeak in which nothing said has a correlative truth in world?  Yet
why is this the case?  It would be silly to think that who enter politics are of
a breed inherently disingenuous.  It is rational corollary to our election cycle
being nothing than a search for the one gaff, that thing said in a way slightly
out of context or without thought.  We punish the act of real speech where
one says things badly, does not explain fully, or sometimes misspeaks.  One
phrase said poorly will define a whole career in a moment, be replayed for years
afterward, and be the subject of countless hours of vapid interpretation and
reinterpretation on the news cycle.  Why risk such a thing when one can just
resort to a fixed set of phrases that have been worked out ahead of time,
reducing the risk of a slip by many magnitudes.  Are we then to punish these
people for their choice?

These binaries, though rhetorically useful, can almost never be actuated in a
democratic republic whose majority is so often tenuous, requiring three branches
of government and (at least historically) a super-majority in the senate for
most legislation.  So neophyte politician soon realizes that one must make
deals, compromise absolutes, and take positions which are neither pure
ideologically nor pure morally when all the carrots and sticks come
to light.  The party faithful, the amateurs[^6], are never really players in the
game, and can never understand why one must give ground if one is to play again
the next day, and again.  In fact, having moralized the who matter, the
politician has painted himself into a corner as now there is no place for him to
find compromise without also compromising his morality.  They are forever pulled
by their base to stand stupidly firm while they themselves stoke the fires which
will be there own undoing in the end. 

--------------

Anyone who has gone to a political rally of their own free will has drunken
deeply of a Cool-Aid which will not easily be undone.  It is to admit that one
wants to become a true believer and not an interested party.  One then comes to
politics as to religion, to be re-converted every weekend in the throws of the
moment.  This is the same type of person who watches Fox or MSNBC, no
truthfully for the news but instead for the faith.  One wants not to understand,
but to be told how the news can fit into ones dogmas as they are.  Affirmation
and re-affirmation is an impulse which drives action more than truth ever can. 



The Question really is one of the sincerity of the actual act in modern life, or
whether this now must come secondary to the signaling inherent in any act.  Both
the left and the right are subject to the same forces, one of which is the now
intolerable 'woke' college student who protests thing which are nothing other
than ridiculous if given any objective viewpoint.  Then you have the response to
the left's ridiculousness, which to the Turning Point USA crowd, which finds the
idea of rebellion in Donald Trump.

The notion of 'meme' has come to full flower with the internet.  We have moved
ever farther away from the thing in and of itself and more into an economy of
the symbolic. 

There has always been a symbolic order, that of the religious especially, a
place where the archetypes were primary, where we could let the quantification
of life go a little bit and fall back into that system of emotions too deep to
have a name. 


Image: "Kayfabe" by suraj bhdur is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 

[^1]: [Economist - Donald Trump is a Pro Wrestler](https://www.economist.com/united-states/2019/04/13/donald-trump-is-a-pro-wrestler-masquerading-as-commander-in-chief)

[^2]: [WrestleMania - Battle of the Billionaire ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5NsrwH9I9vE)

[^3]: Plato, *The Republic*, Bk VIII

[^4]: e.g., *The Paranoid Style in American Politics* by Richard Hofstadter

[^5]: Bryan Caplan, *The Myth of the Rational Voter* (2011)

[^6]: Jonathan Rauch, *Political Realism* (2015)

[^7]: [John McWhorter - The Know-Nothing Campus
'Protest' Movement](https://www.thedailybeast.com/the-know-nothing-campus-protest-movement)

[^8]: [Other Life - The Psychology of Antifa](https://jmrphy.libsyn.com/the-psychology-of-antifa-with-geoffrey-miller)
