---
layout: post
title: Modern Religion
date: 2019-07-10 Wed
description: How modernity has changed the way in which religion is performed
image: /assets/images/
author: Tyler Thomas
tags: [theology, religion]
---

I remember a decade and a half ago when atheism first found its voice and came
charging into the public discourse, denouncing Christianity and waving around a
cudgel of rationality[^4].  The previous quiet skirmishes now past, the first
real battle in what would become the New Atheist movement was afoot, and in an
argumentative style it would break open the taboo on "atheism" as something one
believed only in the privacy of one's own home.  If one had been harboring a
quiet disdain for the whiff of that preachy air, one now had a champion, someone
whom could be cheered while obliterating the still unenlightened.  Events where
organized will titles such as "Religion: Societal good or societal ill", which
promised to settle once and for all life's most abstruse questions.  This was the
moment of glory for the self-coined Four Horsemen[^5], academics who had come
riding out of their tower to bring wrath upon the charlatans and peddlers of
faith, that most irrational and dangerous of memes.

Today this all seems a bit gauche, but at the time I remember a definite
intoxicating sense that a new crack in the culture had opened, that those who
thought dogma a holdover from another time had finally stormed the last bastion.
Of course a minority had always set upon their soapbox and decried religion as a
confidence trick or flowers on the chain, but never was this said so loudly, and
with so much righteous indignation.  No one noticed a truce with modernity had
been made, that religion was to be believed or tolerated indulgently, but never
really openly attacked, until the peace had broken down and war was already on.
It was now only to choose a side, this new form of transgression having opened a
whole new front in the culture war already in full swing.  It wooed its
proselytes, drew its battle lines, and everyone felt like they where engaged in
something very important.

Even though the battle raged, it was a time when a pan-political agreement held
that every candidate was Christian by assumption, bending the knee in ways
unbelievable if pressed.  Religion was still to be taken seriously in politics
by all sides with all actions being by definition found in scripture; this was
before those most moved by the Spirit voting en masse for Donald Trump (the
thrice married adulterer whose language was more pure Id than one enlightened by
Christian charity) and proved once and for all the homage given the Good Book
more a mask upon something ultimately as simple as power. 

Much has happened in the interim.  Thing are once again mainly quiet on the
religion front; But who then won?  This, as it turns out, a more complicated
question to answer then where the sides which fought have believed.  The result
is something more akin to the Peace of Westphalia than to that of Cannae.
Organized religion may indeed have been given a last lethal blow and is dying a
slow death in the West, but not in the way one would have guessed given the
lines on which the battle was fought.  Both sides thought in a binary, that
either one cast aside all irrationalities and gave oneself over completely to
science, or one doubled down on inerrancy and burned the books of the
evolutionists.  But in the end, there was no great triumph of the New Atheists,
who at this point have instead become passe.  Their momentary stridency flared
up and filled lovers and haters with the sense of impending victory a fleeting
second before the whole movement expended itself and faded into the
background. Also, while the faithful were always fighting something of a
rear-guard action and never really expected a Third Great Awakening, there was
no sudden rise of the Antichrist to lead the masses into temptation.  In the
end, like everything so seemingly existential in our modern limited attention
spans, the ever restless cultural discourse changed topic and everyone forgot to
consider religion at all.

Church, the brick and mortar building which brings believers together in
congress to reaffirm as public act their faith, has increasingly fallen out of
favor. A corporate structure as scaffold in one's faith is on the wane as all
denominations are losing members year over year[^1].  Even among those who still
claim adherence to a mainline denomination the feeling of the necessity of
communion is less felt, of the common ritual as something foreign and strange.
More than 40% of millennials who claim for themselves Christianity no longer
claim a congregation. Even the Southern Baptist Convention, the archetype of US
evangelical faith and bastion of traditional belief, is hemorrhaging congregants
every year[^2].  What then remains of functionalism[^10] when all is belief and
nothing remains of the performative?

At the same time that unchurched believers were in the ascendant, the reprobate
have remade themselves not as New Atheists out to evangelize a still misled
world, but instead were busy reinterpreting religion a tool of the patriarchy
and therefore not only silly, but pernicious.  Now for the new Woke Left, if one
was to proclaim a faith too loudly or too biblically, one has in effect just
proclaimed oneself a misogynist in all but name (a certain dispensation given
the black community for 'cultural' reasons).  Religions new detractors conceived
of the traditional dogmas as something more akin to an effect than a cause and
so logical argumentation to be pointless endeavor.  Religion no longer caused
good people to do bad things (in Hitchen's formulation), but we were fallen
first, the original sin of patriarchy and oppression sewn deep in the occidental
mind from which the bible would be mere indictment.  Religion's adversaries no
longer were missionary, going out into the world with reason girding their loins
and ready to battle, but instead retired inside their new battlements only to
glower from atop their ever-growing theoretical walls.  In the new enlightened
interpretation, all was structures of power, and religion once more became
flowers on the chain.  But this time something even deeper and more insidious
than that of capital was at the source. 

And so now a days, not much is said about one's faith in polite company, and not
much is asked.  It is a Don't Ask, Don't Tell for the 21st century.  Being that
at the same time some segment of America was to identify religion as a
demarcator of structural oppression, a contrary mood was also afoot which wanted
the liberation of all truth subject only to the belief in its reciprocal
affirmation.  One was free, nay encouraged to believe what one will, but in a
quiet personal way and to make no great claim of universal truths.  The critique
of the Reformation was that it began with one Pope on the seven hills of Rome
and ended with seven popes on every dunghill in Europe; now their is no need of
popes as each is to find a spirituality not even bound by some allegiance to
*sola scriptura* or any such stricture. 


Actually theological knowledge has always been something suspect[^3], with only
white Evangelical Christians managing to get a score above 50% on questions of
the Christian faith (all other demographics falling south of half).  Most
congregants it would seem are happy with the conviction that someone, somewhere
has worked out the details.  Since the advent of religious knowledge polling, I
know of no country or religion which can claim its adherents show a real concern
with any questions above the most basic, and even these are ask too much most of
the time.  The only thing which seemed to invest a section of the US with a new
thirst for religious knowledge was the momentary thrust of atheism into the
cultural dialog.  For a moment both sides cracked open their bibles in an arms
race that was never won by either while both claimed victory. And then the
culture moved on bored with the debate.

Religion may no longer be best word to describe the current diffusion of ideas.
For most it now seems a grab bag of bits stolen from a myriad contexts.  Belief
in heaven seems to track pretty consistently at 72% polled, while hell, it turns
out, is less certain with only three quarters of those which also claim its
opposite[^6].  God seems permanently popular[^7] at 80%, though I would posit
more ill defined than before.  God has always been more an empty box for a
concept than one in-and-of itself.  Jesus added a theory of mind this
abstraction, which allowed a ready anthropomorphization. With only a slim
majority associating God with the biblical account, the concrete notions of
divinity slips back into the undefined. 

One hears too frequently a flippant quoting of Chesterton, *“When men stop
believing in God, they don't believe in nothing — they believe in
anything.[^9]"* It may indeed be more true than one would think given a critical
eye, but maybe also in a diffuse manner than an idiomatic understanding of
religion.  John McWhorter writes of the way a certain demographic has re-imaged
the essence of salvation into something which would be denied as such by all,
having folded the faith so clandestinely as to be deniable. In as much as
Protestantism is iconoclastic, desirous of the destruction of the symbols of
faith and wishing to tear down the cathedrals and instead make god immanent,
they have succeeded beyond their own imagining.

In the middle-class city-dwelling bubble which I find myself, it is a rare event
to find someone who would talk of their faith at, enough either to worry
about the bible one way or the other.  Kierkegaard would complain of the ease in
which the Danes held their faith, a passive belief which required no great
struggle of self.  Today apathy extends to any kind of doctrine and instead
floats lightly in some vagary which is no longer bounded by a larger
theology. 

Religion and politics are the two things which are most held close to the heart,
to a sense of self, and yet neither one exists as a rational construct, but both
must sit so close because they are in the end pure emotional constructs.  Both
are close in way inexplicable to those who hold them, and this is why they are
touchy.  It is as if asked to explain why one roots for the sports team one does;
there is no answer, only an emotion inherent in the act.

[^1]: [Gallup - Church attendance hits new two decade low](https://news.gallup.com/poll/248837/church-membership-down-sharply-past-two-decades.aspx)

[^2]: [The Economist - The Southern Baptists are beset by two related fiascos](https://www.economist.com/united-states/2019/06/15/the-southern-baptists-are-beset-by-two-related-fiascos)

[^3]: [Pew - US religious knowledge survey](https://www.pewforum.org/2010/09/28/u-s-religious-knowledge-survey/)

[^4]: *The God Delusion* by Richard Dawkins was published in 2006, the same year
    which Sam Harris published his book *Letter to a Christian Nation*. The
    following year *God is not Great* by Christopher Hitchens came out. 

[^5]: [YouTube - The Four Horsemen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9DKhc1pcDFM)

[^6]: [Pew - Belief in Heaven](https://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/belief-in-heaven/)

[^7]: [Pew - Belief in God](https://www.pewforum.org/2018/04/25/when-americans-say-they-believe-in-god-what-do-they-mean/)

[^8]: [Daily Beast - Antiracism, Our Flawed New
Religion](https://www.thedailybeast.com/antiracism-our-flawed-new-religion)

[^9]: I hesitate to use quotes in this case, as no phrase such as this is found
    in any of Chesterton's works. While widely attributed to him, the specific
    verbiage seems to vary from citation to citation with only the gist as
    constant such that any reference to this is really more a paraphrase at best.

[^10]: [Sociology of Religion - Functionalism](https://opentextbc.ca/introductiontosociology/chapter/chapter-15-religion/)
